docs/source/visualisation/projection.rst, before:

Projection
==========

The :mod:`swiftsimio.visualisation.projection` sub-module provides an interface
to render SWIFT data projected to a grid. This takes your 3D data and projects
it down to 2D, such that if you request masses to be smoothed then these
functions return a surface density.

This effectively solves the equation:

:math:`\tilde{A}_i = \sum_j A_j W_{ij, 2D}`

with :math:`\tilde{A}_i` the smoothed quantity in pixel :math:`i`, and
:math:`j` all particles in the simulation, with :math:`W` the 2D kernel.
Here we use the Wendland-C2 kernel.

The primary function here is
:func:`swiftsimio.visualisation.projection.project_gas`, which allows you to
create a gas projection of any field. See the example below.

Example
-------

.. code-block:: python

   from swiftsimio import load
   from swiftsimio.visualisation.projection import project_gas

   data = load("cosmo_volume_example.hdf5")

   # This creates a grid that has units msun / Mpc^2, and can be transformed like
   # any other cosmo_array
   mass_map = project_gas(
       data,
       resolution=1024,
       project="masses",
       parallel=True,
       periodic=True,
   )

   # Let's say we wish to save it as msun / kpc^2,
   from unyt import msun, kpc
   mass_map.convert_to_units(msun / kpc**2)

   from matplotlib.pyplot import imsave
   from matplotlib.colors import LogNorm

   # Normalize and save
   imsave("gas_surface_dens_map.png", LogNorm()(mass_map.value), cmap="viridis")


This basic demonstration creates a mass surface density map.

To create, for example, a projected temperature map, we need to remove the
surface density dependence (i.e. :func:`~swiftsimio.visualisation.projection.project_gas` returns a surface
temperature in units of K / kpc^2 and we just want K) by dividing out by
this:

.. code-block:: python

   from swiftsimio import load
   from swiftsimio.visualisation.projection import project_gas

   data = load("cosmo_volume_example.hdf5")

   # First create a mass-weighted temperature dataset
   data.gas.mass_weighted_temps = data.gas.masses * data.gas.temperatures

   # Map in msun / mpc^2
   mass_map = project_gas(
       data,
       resolution=1024,
       project="masses",
       parallel=True,
       periodic=True,
   )
   # Map in msun * K / mpc^2
   mass_weighted_temp_map = project_gas(
       data,
       resolution=1024,
       project="mass_weighted_temps",
       parallel=True,
       periodic=True,
   )

   temp_map = mass_weighted_temp_map / mass_map

   from unyt import K
   temp_map.convert_to_units(K)

   from matplotlib.pyplot import imsave
   from matplotlib.colors import LogNorm

   # Normalize and save
   imsave("temp_map.png", LogNorm()(temp_map.value), cmap="twilight")


The output from this example, when used with the example data provided in the
loading data section should look something like:

.. image:: temp_map.png

Backends
--------

In certain cases, rather than just using this facility for visualisation, you
will wish that the values that are returned to be as well converged as
possible. For this, we provide several different backends. These are passed
as ``backend="str"`` to all of the projection visualisation functions, and
are available in the module
:mod:`swiftsimio.visualisation.projection.projection_backends`. The available
backends are as follows:

+ ``fast``: The default backend - this is extremely fast, and provides very basic
  smoothing, with a return type of single precision floating point numbers.
+ ``histogram``: This backend provides zero smoothing, and acts in a similar way
  to the :func:`~numpy.histogram2d` function but with the same arguments as ``scatter``.
+ ``reference``: The same backend as ``fast`` but with two distinguishing features:
  all calculations are performed in double precision, and it will return early
  with a warning message if there are not enough pixels to fully resolve each kernel.
  Intended for developer usage, regular users should not use this mode.
+ ``renormalised``: The same as ``fast``, but each kernel is evaluated twice and
  renormalised to ensure mass conservation within floating point precision. Returns
  single precision arrays.
+ ``subsampled``: This is the recommended mode for users who wish to have converged
  results even at low resolution. Each kernel is evaluated at least 32 times, with
  overlaps between pixels considered for every single particle. Returns in
  double precision.
+ ``subsampled_extreme``: The same as ``subsampled``, but provides 64 kernel
  evaluations.
+ ``gpu``: The same as ``fast`` but uses CUDA for faster computation on supported
  GPUs. The parallel implementation is the same function as the non-parallel.

Example:

.. code-block:: python

   from swiftsimio import load
   from swiftsimio.visualisation.projection import project_gas

   data = load("cosmo_volume_example.hdf5")

   subsampled_array = project_gas(
      data,
      resolution=1024,
      project="entropies",
      parallel=True,
      backend="subsampled",
      periodic=True,
   )

This will likely look very similar to the image that you make with the default
``backend="fast"``, but will have a well-converged distribution at any resolution
level.

Periodic boundaries
-------------------

Cosmological simulations and many other simulations use periodic boundary
conditions. This has implications for the particles at the edge of the
simulation box: they can contribute to pixels on multiple sides of the image.
If this effect is not taken into account, then the pixels close to the edge
will have values that are too low because of missing contributions.

All visualisation functions by default assume a periodic box. Rather than
simply projecting each individual particle once, four additional periodic copies
of each particle are also projected. Most copies will project outside the valid
pixel range, but the copies that do not ensure that pixels close to the edge
receive all necessary contributions. Thanks to :mod:`numba` optimisations, the overhead
of these additional copies is relatively small.

There are some caveats with this approach. If you try to visualise a subset of
the particles in the box (e.g. using a mask), then only periodic copies of
particles in this subset will be used. If the subset does not include particles
on the other side of the periodic boundary, then these will still be missing
from the projection. The same is true if you visualise a region of the box.

Rotations
---------

Sometimes you will need to visualise a galaxy from a different perspective.
The :mod:`swiftsimio.visualisation.rotation` sub-module provides routines to
generate rotation matrices corresponding to vectors, which can then be
provided to the ``rotation_matrix`` argument of :func:`~swiftsimio.visualisation.projection.project_gas` (and
:func:`~swiftsimio.visualisation.projection.project_gas_pixel_grid`). You will also need to supply the
``rotation_center`` argument, as the rotation takes place around this given
point. The example code below loads a snapshot, and a halo catalogue, and
creates an edge-on and face-on projection using the integration in
``velociraptor``. More information on possible integrations with this library
is shown in the ``velociraptor`` section.

.. code-block:: python

   from swiftsimio import load, mask, cosmo_array
   from velociraptor import load as load_catalogue
   from swiftsimio.visualisation.rotation import rotation_matrix_from_vector
   from swiftsimio.visualisation.projection import project_gas
   
   import unyt
   import numpy as np
   
   # Radius around which to load data, we will visualise half of this
   size = 1000 * unyt.kpc
   
   snapshot_filename = "cosmo_volume_example.hdf5"
   catalogue_filename = "cosmo_volume_example.properties"
   
   catalogue = load_catalogue(catalogue_filename)
   
   # Which halo should we visualise?
   halo = 0
   
   x = catalogue.positions.xcmbp[halo]
   y = catalogue.positions.ycmbp[halo]
   z = catalogue.positions.zcmbp[halo]
   
   lx = catalogue.angular_momentum.lx[halo]
   ly = catalogue.angular_momentum.ly[halo]
   lz = catalogue.angular_momentum.lz[halo]
   
   # The angular momentum vector will point perpendicular to the galaxy disk.
   # If your simulation contains stars, use lx_star
   angular_momentum_vector = np.array([lx.value, ly.value, lz.value])
   angular_momentum_vector /= np.linalg.norm(angular_momentum_vector)
   
   face_on_rotation_matrix = rotation_matrix_from_vector(angular_momentum_vector)
   edge_on_rotation_matrix = rotation_matrix_from_vector(angular_momentum_vector, axis="y")
   
   data_mask = mask(snapshot_filename)
   region = cosmo_array(
       [
           [x - size, x + size],
           [y - size, y + size],
           [z - size, z + size],
       ],
       x.units,
       comoving=True,
       scale_factor=data_mask.metadata.a,
       scale_exponent=1,
   )
   
   visualise_region = cosmo_array(
       [
           x - 0.5 * size,
           x + 0.5 * size,
           y - 0.5 * size,
           y + 0.5 * size,
       ],
       comoving=True,
       scale_factor=data_mask.metadata.a,
       scale_exponent=1,
   )
   
   data_mask.constrain_spatial(region)
   data = load(snapshot_filename, mask=data_mask)
   
   # Use project_gas_pixel_grid to generate projected images
   
   common_arguments = dict(
       data=data,
       resolution=512,
       parallel=True,
       region=visualise_region,
   )
   
   un_rotated = project_gas(**common_arguments)
   
   rotation_center = cosmo_array(
       [x, y, z], comoving=True, scale_factor=data_mask.metadata.a, scale_exponent=1
   )
   face_on = project_gas(
       **common_arguments,
       rotation_center=rotation_center,
       rotation_matrix=face_on_rotation_matrix,
   )
   
   edge_on = project_gas(
       **common_arguments,
       rotation_center=rotation_center,
       rotation_matrix=edge_on_rotation_matrix,
   )
   
Using this with the provided example data will just show blobs due to its low resolution
nature. Using one of the EAGLE volumes (``examples/EAGLE_ICs``) will produce much nicer
galaxies, but that data is too large to provide as an example in this tutorial.

You can also provide an extra two values, the z min and max, as part of the
``region`` parameter. This may have some slight performance impact, so it is
generally advised that you do this on sub-loaded volumes only.


Other particle types
--------------------

Other particle types are able to be visualised through the use of the
:func:`swiftsimio.visualisation.projection.project_pixel_grid` function.

To use this feature for particle types that do not have smoothing lengths, you
will need to generate them, as in the example below where we create a
mass density map for dark matter. We provide a utility to do this through
:func:`~swiftsimio.visualisation.smoothing_length.generate.generate_smoothing_lengths`.

.. code-block:: python

   from swiftsimio import load
   from swiftsimio.visualisation.projection import project_pixel_grid
   from swiftsimio.visualisation.smoothing_length import generate_smoothing_lengths

   data = load("cosmo_volume_example.hdf5")

   # Generate smoothing lengths for the dark matter
   data.dark_matter.smoothing_length = generate_smoothing_lengths(
       data.dark_matter.coordinates,
       data.metadata.boxsize,
       kernel_gamma=1.8,
       neighbours=57,
       speedup_fac=2,
       dimension=3,
   )

   # Project the dark matter mass
   dm_mass = project_pixel_grid(
       # Note here that we pass in the dark matter dataset not the whole
       # data object, to specify what particle type we wish to visualise
       data=data.dark_matter,
       resolution=1024,
       project="masses",
       parallel=True,
       region=None,
       periodic=True,
   )

   from matplotlib.pyplot import imsave
   from matplotlib.colors import LogNorm

   # Everyone knows that dark matter is purple
   imsave("dm_mass_map.png", LogNorm()(dm_mass), cmap="inferno")

The output from this example, when used with the example data provided in the
loading data section should look something like:

.. image:: dm_mass_map.png


Lower-level API
---------------

The lower-level API for projections allows for any general positions,
smoothing lengths, and smoothed quantities, to generate a pixel grid that
represents the smoothed version of the data.

This API is available through
:obj:`swiftsimio.visualisation.projection_backends.backends["scatter"]` and
:obj:`swiftsimio.visualisation.projection_backends.backends_parallel["scatter"]` for the parallel
version. The parallel version uses significantly more memory as it allocates
a thread-local image array for each thread, summing them in the end. Here we
will only describe the ``scatter`` variant, but they behave in the exact same way.

By default this uses the "fast" backend. To use the others, you can select them
manually from the module, or by using the ``backends`` and ``backends_parallel``
dictionaries in :mod:`swiftsimio.visualisation.projection_backends`.

To use this function, you will need:

+ x-positions of all of your particles, ``x``.
+ y-positions of all of your particles, ``y``.
+ A quantity which you wish to smooth for all particles, such as their
  mass, ``m``.
+ Smoothing lengths for all particles, ``h``.
+ The resolution you wish to make your square image at, ``res``.

Optionally, you will also need:
+ the size of the simulation box in x and y, ``box_x`` and ``box_y``.

The key here is that only particles in the domain [0, 1] in x, and [0, 1] in y
will be visible in the image. You may have particles outside of this range;
they will not crash the code, and may even contribute to the image if their
smoothing lengths overlap with [0, 1]. You will need to re-scale your data
such that it lives within this range. You should also pass raw numpy arrays (not
:class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array` or :class:`~unyt.array.unyt_array`, the
inputs are dimensionless). Then you may use the function as follows:

.. code-block:: python

   from swiftsimio.visualisation.projection import scatter

   # Using the variable names from above
   out = scatter(x=x, y=y, h=h, m=m, res=res)

``out`` will be a 2D :class:`~numpy.ndarray` grid of shape ``[res, res]``. You will need
to re-scale this back to your original dimensions to get it in the correct units,
and do not forget that it now represents the smoothed quantity per surface area.

If the optional arguments ``box_x`` and ``box_y`` are provided, they should
contain the simulation box size in the same re-scaled coordinates as ``x`` and
``y``. The projection backend will then correctly apply periodic boundary
wrapping. If ``box_x`` and ``box_y`` are not provided or set to ``0``, no
periodic boundaries are applied.

Commit message:

Restore mention of periodic and rotation incompatibility.

docs/source/visualisation/projection.rst, after:

Projection
==========

The :mod:`swiftsimio.visualisation.projection` sub-module provides an interface
to render SWIFT data projected to a grid. This takes your 3D data and projects
it down to 2D, such that if you request masses to be smoothed then these
functions return a surface density.

This effectively solves the equation:

:math:`\tilde{A}_i = \sum_j A_j W_{ij, 2D}`

with :math:`\tilde{A}_i` the smoothed quantity in pixel :math:`i`, and
:math:`j` all particles in the simulation, with :math:`W` the 2D kernel.
Here we use the Wendland-C2 kernel.

The primary function here is
:func:`swiftsimio.visualisation.projection.project_gas`, which allows you to
create a gas projection of any field. See the example below.

Example
-------

.. code-block:: python

   from swiftsimio import load
   from swiftsimio.visualisation.projection import project_gas

   data = load("cosmo_volume_example.hdf5")

   # This creates a grid that has units msun / Mpc^2, and can be transformed like
   # any other cosmo_array
   mass_map = project_gas(
       data,
       resolution=1024,
       project="masses",
       parallel=True,
       periodic=True,
   )

   # Let's say we wish to save it as msun / kpc^2,
   from unyt import msun, kpc
   mass_map.convert_to_units(msun / kpc**2)

   from matplotlib.pyplot import imsave
   from matplotlib.colors import LogNorm

   # Normalize and save
   imsave("gas_surface_dens_map.png", LogNorm()(mass_map.value), cmap="viridis")


This basic demonstration creates a mass surface density map.

To create, for example, a projected temperature map, we need to remove the
surface density dependence (i.e. :func:`~swiftsimio.visualisation.projection.project_gas` returns a surface
temperature in units of K / kpc^2 and we just want K) by dividing out by
this:

.. code-block:: python

   from swiftsimio import load
   from swiftsimio.visualisation.projection import project_gas

   data = load("cosmo_volume_example.hdf5")

   # First create a mass-weighted temperature dataset
   data.gas.mass_weighted_temps = data.gas.masses * data.gas.temperatures

   # Map in msun / mpc^2
   mass_map = project_gas(
       data,
       resolution=1024,
       project="masses",
       parallel=True,
       periodic=True,
   )
   # Map in msun * K / mpc^2
   mass_weighted_temp_map = project_gas(
       data,
       resolution=1024,
       project="mass_weighted_temps",
       parallel=True,
       periodic=True,
   )

   temp_map = mass_weighted_temp_map / mass_map

   from unyt import K
   temp_map.convert_to_units(K)

   from matplotlib.pyplot import imsave
   from matplotlib.colors import LogNorm

   # Normalize and save
   imsave("temp_map.png", LogNorm()(temp_map.value), cmap="twilight")


The output from this example, when used with the example data provided in the
loading data section should look something like:

.. image:: temp_map.png

Backends
--------

In certain cases, rather than just using this facility for visualisation, you
will wish that the values that are returned to be as well converged as
possible. For this, we provide several different backends. These are passed
as ``backend="str"`` to all of the projection visualisation functions, and
are available in the module
:mod:`swiftsimio.visualisation.projection.projection_backends`. The available
backends are as follows:

+ ``fast``: The default backend - this is extremely fast, and provides very basic
  smoothing, with a return type of single precision floating point numbers.
+ ``histogram``: This backend provides zero smoothing, and acts in a similar way
  to the :func:`~numpy.histogram2d` function but with the same arguments as ``scatter``.
+ ``reference``: The same backend as ``fast`` but with two distinguishing features:
  all calculations are performed in double precision, and it will return early
  with a warning message if there are not enough pixels to fully resolve each kernel.
  Intended for developer usage, regular users should not use this mode.
+ ``renormalised``: The same as ``fast``, but each kernel is evaluated twice and
  renormalised to ensure mass conservation within floating point precision. Returns
  single precision arrays.
+ ``subsampled``: This is the recommended mode for users who wish to have converged
  results even at low resolution. Each kernel is evaluated at least 32 times, with
  overlaps between pixels considered for every single particle. Returns in
  double precision.
+ ``subsampled_extreme``: The same as ``subsampled``, but provides 64 kernel
  evaluations.
+ ``gpu``: The same as ``fast`` but uses CUDA for faster computation on supported
  GPUs. The parallel implementation is the same function as the non-parallel.

Example:

.. code-block:: python

   from swiftsimio import load
   from swiftsimio.visualisation.projection import project_gas

   data = load("cosmo_volume_example.hdf5")

   subsampled_array = project_gas(
      data,
      resolution=1024,
      project="entropies",
      parallel=True,
      backend="subsampled",
      periodic=True,
   )

This will likely look very similar to the image that you make with the default
``backend="fast"``, but will have a well-converged distribution at any resolution
level.

Periodic boundaries
-------------------

Cosmological simulations and many other simulations use periodic boundary
conditions. This has implications for the particles at the edge of the
simulation box: they can contribute to pixels on multiple sides of the image.
If this effect is not taken into account, then the pixels close to the edge
will have values that are too low because of missing contributions.

All visualisation functions by default assume a periodic box. Rather than
simply projecting each individual particle once, four additional periodic copies
of each particle are also projected. Most copies will project outside the valid
pixel range, but the copies that do not ensure that pixels close to the edge
receive all necessary contributions. Thanks to :mod:`numba` optimisations, the overhead
of these additional copies is relatively small.

There are some caveats with this approach. If you try to visualise a subset of
the particles in the box (e.g. using a mask), then only periodic copies of
particles in this subset will be used. If the subset does not include particles
on the other side of the periodic boundary, then these will still be missing
from the projection. The same is true if you visualise a region of the box. The periodic boundary wrapping is also not compatible with rotations (see below) and should therefore not be used together with a rotation.

Rotations
---------

Sometimes you will need to visualise a galaxy from a different perspective.
The :mod:`swiftsimio.visualisation.rotation` sub-module provides routines to
generate rotation matrices corresponding to vectors, which can then be
provided to the ``rotation_matrix`` argument of :func:`~swiftsimio.visualisation.projection.project_gas` (and
:func:`~swiftsimio.visualisation.projection.project_gas_pixel_grid`). You will also need to supply the
``rotation_center`` argument, as the rotation takes place around this given
point. The example code below loads a snapshot, and a halo catalogue, and
creates an edge-on and face-on projection using the integration in
``velociraptor``. More information on possible integrations with this library
is shown in the ``velociraptor`` section.

.. code-block:: python

   from swiftsimio import load, mask, cosmo_array
   from velociraptor import load as load_catalogue
   from swiftsimio.visualisation.rotation import rotation_matrix_from_vector
   from swiftsimio.visualisation.projection import project_gas
   
   import unyt
   import numpy as np
   
   # Radius around which to load data, we will visualise half of this
   size = 1000 * unyt.kpc
   
   snapshot_filename = "cosmo_volume_example.hdf5"
   catalogue_filename = "cosmo_volume_example.properties"
   
   catalogue = load_catalogue(catalogue_filename)
   
   # Which halo should we visualise?
   halo = 0
   
   x = catalogue.positions.xcmbp[halo]
   y = catalogue.positions.ycmbp[halo]
   z = catalogue.positions.zcmbp[halo]
   
   lx = catalogue.angular_momentum.lx[halo]
   ly = catalogue.angular_momentum.ly[halo]
   lz = catalogue.angular_momentum.lz[halo]
   
   # The angular momentum vector will point perpendicular to the galaxy disk.
   # If your simulation contains stars, use lx_star
   angular_momentum_vector = np.array([lx.value, ly.value, lz.value])
   angular_momentum_vector /= np.linalg.norm(angular_momentum_vector)
   
   face_on_rotation_matrix = rotation_matrix_from_vector(angular_momentum_vector)
   edge_on_rotation_matrix = rotation_matrix_from_vector(angular_momentum_vector, axis="y")
   
   data_mask = mask(snapshot_filename)
   region = cosmo_array(
       [
           [x - size, x + size],
           [y - size, y + size],
           [z - size, z + size],
       ],
       x.units,
       comoving=True,
       scale_factor=data_mask.metadata.a,
       scale_exponent=1,
   )
   
   visualise_region = cosmo_array(
       [
           x - 0.5 * size,
           x + 0.5 * size,
           y - 0.5 * size,
           y + 0.5 * size,
       ],
       comoving=True,
       scale_factor=data_mask.metadata.a,
       scale_exponent=1,
   )
   
   data_mask.constrain_spatial(region)
   data = load(snapshot_filename, mask=data_mask)
   
   # Use project_gas_pixel_grid to generate projected images
   
   common_arguments = dict(
       data=data,
       resolution=512,
       parallel=True,
       region=visualise_region,
   )
   
   un_rotated = project_gas(**common_arguments)
   
   rotation_center = cosmo_array(
       [x, y, z], comoving=True, scale_factor=data_mask.metadata.a, scale_exponent=1
   )
   face_on = project_gas(
       **common_arguments,
       rotation_center=rotation_center,
       rotation_matrix=face_on_rotation_matrix,
   )
   
   edge_on = project_gas(
       **common_arguments,
       rotation_center=rotation_center,
       rotation_matrix=edge_on_rotation_matrix,
   )
   
Using this with the provided example data will just show blobs due to its low resolution
nature. Using one of the EAGLE volumes (``examples/EAGLE_ICs``) will produce much nicer
galaxies, but that data is too large to provide as an example in this tutorial.

You can also provide an extra two values, the z min and max, as part of the
``region`` parameter. This may have some slight performance impact, so it is
generally advised that you do this on sub-loaded volumes only.


Other particle types
--------------------

Other particle types are able to be visualised through the use of the
:func:`swiftsimio.visualisation.projection.project_pixel_grid` function.

To use this feature for particle types that do not have smoothing lengths, you
will need to generate them, as in the example below where we create a
mass density map for dark matter. We provide a utility to do this through
:func:`~swiftsimio.visualisation.smoothing_length.generate.generate_smoothing_lengths`.

.. code-block:: python

   from swiftsimio import load
   from swiftsimio.visualisation.projection import project_pixel_grid
   from swiftsimio.visualisation.smoothing_length import generate_smoothing_lengths

   data = load("cosmo_volume_example.hdf5")

   # Generate smoothing lengths for the dark matter
   data.dark_matter.smoothing_length = generate_smoothing_lengths(
       data.dark_matter.coordinates,
       data.metadata.boxsize,
       kernel_gamma=1.8,
       neighbours=57,
       speedup_fac=2,
       dimension=3,
   )

   # Project the dark matter mass
   dm_mass = project_pixel_grid(
       # Note here that we pass in the dark matter dataset not the whole
       # data object, to specify what particle type we wish to visualise
       data=data.dark_matter,
       resolution=1024,
       project="masses",
       parallel=True,
       region=None,
       periodic=True,
   )

   from matplotlib.pyplot import imsave
   from matplotlib.colors import LogNorm

   # Everyone knows that dark matter is purple
   imsave("dm_mass_map.png", LogNorm()(dm_mass), cmap="inferno")

The output from this example, when used with the example data provided in the
loading data section should look something like:

.. image:: dm_mass_map.png


Lower-level API
---------------

The lower-level API for projections allows for any general positions,
smoothing lengths, and smoothed quantities, to generate a pixel grid that
represents the smoothed version of the data.

This API is available through
:obj:`swiftsimio.visualisation.projection_backends.backends["scatter"]` and
:obj:`swiftsimio.visualisation.projection_backends.backends_parallel["scatter"]` for the parallel
version. The parallel version uses significantly more memory as it allocates
a thread-local image array for each thread, summing them in the end. Here we
will only describe the ``scatter`` variant, but they behave in the exact same way.

By default this uses the "fast" backend. To use the others, you can select them
manually from the module, or by using the ``backends`` and ``backends_parallel``
dictionaries in :mod:`swiftsimio.visualisation.projection_backends`.

To use this function, you will need:

+ x-positions of all of your particles, ``x``.
+ y-positions of all of your particles, ``y``.
+ A quantity which you wish to smooth for all particles, such as their
  mass, ``m``.
+ Smoothing lengths for all particles, ``h``.
+ The resolution you wish to make your square image at, ``res``.

Optionally, you will also need:
+ the size of the simulation box in x and y, ``box_x`` and ``box_y``.

The key here is that only particles in the domain [0, 1] in x, and [0, 1] in y
will be visible in the image. You may have particles outside of this range;
they will not crash the code, and may even contribute to the image if their
smoothing lengths overlap with [0, 1]. You will need to re-scale your data
such that it lives within this range. You should also pass raw numpy arrays (not
:class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array` or :class:`~unyt.array.unyt_array`, the
inputs are dimensionless). Then you may use the function as follows:

.. code-block:: python

   from swiftsimio.visualisation.projection import scatter

   # Using the variable names from above
   out = scatter(x=x, y=y, h=h, m=m, res=res)

``out`` will be a 2D :class:`~numpy.ndarray` grid of shape ``[res, res]``. You will need
to re-scale this back to your original dimensions to get it in the correct units,
and do not forget that it now represents the smoothed quantity per surface area.

If the optional arguments ``box_x`` and ``box_y`` are provided, they should
contain the simulation box size in the same re-scaled coordinates as ``x`` and
``y``. The projection backend will then correctly apply periodic boundary
wrapping. If ``box_x`` and ``box_y`` are not provided or set to ``0``, no
periodic boundaries are applied.
