docs/source/cosmo_array/index.rst, before:

The ``cosmo_array``
===================

:mod:`swiftsimio` uses a customized class based on the :class:`~unyt.array.unyt_array`
to store data arrays. The :class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array` has all of the same
functionality as the :class:`~unyt.array.unyt_array`, but also adds information about
data transformation between physical and comoving coordinates, and descriptive metadata.

For instance, should you ever need to know what a dataset represents, you can
ask for a description by accessing the ``name`` attribute:

.. code-block:: python

   print(rho_gas.name)

which will output ``Co-moving mass densities of the particles``.

The cosmology information is stored in three attributes:

 + ``comoving``
 + ``cosmo_factor``
 + ``valid_transform``

The ``comoving`` attribute specifies whether the array is a physical (``True``) or
comoving (``False``) quantity, while the ``cosmo_factor`` stores the expression needed
to convert back and forth between comoving and physical quantities and the value of
the scale factor. The conversion factors can be accessed like this:

.. code-block:: python

   # Conversion factor to make the densities a physical quantity
   print(rho_gas.cosmo_factor.a_factor)
   physical_rho_gas = rho_gas.cosmo_factor.a_factor * rho_gas

   # Symbolic scale-factor expression
   print(rho_gas.cosmo_factor.expr)

which will output ``132651.002785671`` and ``a**(-3.0)``. Converting an array to/from physical/comoving
is done with the :meth:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array.to_physical`, :meth:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array.to_comoving`, :meth:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array.convert_to_physical` and :meth:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array.to_comoving` methods, for instance:

.. code-block:: python

   physical_rho_gas = rho_gas.to_physical()

   # Convert in-place
   rho_gas.convert_to_physical()

The ``valid_transform`` is a boolean flag that is set to ``False`` for some arrays that don't make sense to convert to comoving.

:class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array` supports array arithmetic and the entire :mod:`numpy` range of functions. Attempting to combine arrays (e.g. by addition) will validate the cosmology information first. The implementation is designed to be permissive: it will only raise exceptions when a genuinely invalid combination is encountered, but is tolerant of missing cosmology information. When one argument in a relevant operation (like addition, for example) is not a :class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array` the attributes of the :class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array` will be assumed for both arguments. In such cases a warning is produced stating that this assumption has been made.

.. note::

   :class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array` and the related :class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_quantity` are now intended to support all :mod:`numpy` functions, propagating units and cosmology information correctly through mathematical operations. Try making a histogram with weights and ``density=True`` with :func:`numpy.histogram`! There are a large number of functions and a very large number of possible parameter combinations, so some corner cases may have been missed in development. Please report any errors or unexpected results using github issues or other channels so that they can be fixed. Currently :mod:`scipy` functions are not supported (although some might "just work"). Requests to support specific functions can be accommodated.

To make the most of the utility offered by the :class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array` class, it is helpful to know how to create your own. A good template for this looks like:

.. code-block:: python

   import unyt as u
   from swiftsimio.objects import cosmo_array, cosmo_factor

   # suppose the scale factor is 0.5 and it scales as a**1, then: 
   my_cosmo_array = cosmo_array(
       [1, 2, 3],
       u.Mpc,
       comoving=True,
       scale_factor=0.5,  # a=0.5, i.e. z=1
       scale_exponent=1,  # distances scale as a**1, so the scale exponent is 1
   )
   # consider getting the scale factor from metadata when applicable, i.e. replace:
   # scale_factor=0.5
   # with:
   # scale_factor=data.metadata.a

There is also a very similar :class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_quantity` class designed for scalar values,
analogous to the :class:`~unyt.array.unyt_quantity`. You may encounter this being returned by :mod:`numpy` functions. Cosmology-aware scalar values can be initialized similarly:

.. code-block:: python

   import unyt as u
   from swiftsimio.objects import cosmo_quantity, cosmo_factor

   my_cosmo_quantity = cosmo_quantity(
       2,
       u.Mpc,
       comoving=False,
       scale_factor=0.5,
       cosmo_factor=1,
   )

Commit message:

Add simultaneous physical and unit conversion (#224)

docs/source/cosmo_array/index.rst, after:

The ``cosmo_array``
===================

:mod:`swiftsimio` uses a customized class based on the :class:`~unyt.array.unyt_array`
to store data arrays. The :class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array` has all of the same
functionality as the :class:`~unyt.array.unyt_array`, but also adds information about
data transformation between physical and comoving coordinates, and descriptive metadata.

For instance, should you ever need to know what a dataset represents, you can
ask for a description by accessing the ``name`` attribute:

.. code-block:: python

   print(rho_gas.name)

which will output ``Co-moving mass densities of the particles``.

The cosmology information is stored in three attributes:

 + ``comoving``
 + ``cosmo_factor``
 + ``valid_transform``

The ``comoving`` attribute specifies whether the array is a physical (``True``) or
comoving (``False``) quantity, while the ``cosmo_factor`` stores the expression needed
to convert back and forth between comoving and physical quantities and the value of
the scale factor. The conversion factors can be accessed like this:

.. code-block:: python

   # Conversion factor to make the densities a physical quantity
   print(rho_gas.cosmo_factor.a_factor)
   physical_rho_gas = rho_gas.cosmo_factor.a_factor * rho_gas

   # Symbolic scale-factor expression
   print(rho_gas.cosmo_factor.expr)

which will output ``132651.002785671`` and ``a**(-3.0)``. Converting an array to/from physical/comoving
is done with the :meth:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array.to_physical`, :meth:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array.to_comoving`, :meth:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array.convert_to_physical` and :meth:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array.to_comoving` methods, for instance:

.. code-block:: python

   physical_rho_gas = rho_gas.to_physical()

   # Convert in-place
   rho_gas.convert_to_physical()

If you instead want to get the raw array values in either physical or comoving units, the :meth:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array.to_physical_value` and :meth:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array.to_comoving_value` are provided, analogous to the :meth:`~unyt.unyt_array.unyt_array.to_value`.

The ``valid_transform`` is a boolean flag that is set to ``False`` for some arrays that don't make sense to convert to comoving.

:class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array` supports array arithmetic and the entire :mod:`numpy` range of functions. Attempting to combine arrays (e.g. by addition) will validate the cosmology information first. The implementation is designed to be permissive: it will only raise exceptions when a genuinely invalid combination is encountered, but is tolerant of missing cosmology information. When one argument in a relevant operation (like addition, for example) is not a :class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array` the attributes of the :class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array` will be assumed for both arguments. In such cases a warning is produced stating that this assumption has been made.

.. note::

   :class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array` and the related :class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_quantity` are now intended to support all :mod:`numpy` functions, propagating units and cosmology information correctly through mathematical operations. Try making a histogram with weights and ``density=True`` with :func:`numpy.histogram`! There are a large number of functions and a very large number of possible parameter combinations, so some corner cases may have been missed in development. Please report any errors or unexpected results using github issues or other channels so that they can be fixed. Currently :mod:`scipy` functions are not supported (although some might "just work"). Requests to support specific functions can be accommodated.

To make the most of the utility offered by the :class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_array` class, it is helpful to know how to create your own. A good template for this looks like:

.. code-block:: python

   import unyt as u
   from swiftsimio.objects import cosmo_array, cosmo_factor

   # suppose the scale factor is 0.5 and it scales as a**1, then: 
   my_cosmo_array = cosmo_array(
       [1, 2, 3],
       u.Mpc,
       comoving=True,
       scale_factor=0.5,  # a=0.5, i.e. z=1
       scale_exponent=1,  # distances scale as a**1, so the scale exponent is 1
   )
   # consider getting the scale factor from metadata when applicable, i.e. replace:
   # scale_factor=0.5
   # with:
   # scale_factor=data.metadata.a

There is also a very similar :class:`~swiftsimio.objects.cosmo_quantity` class designed for scalar values,
analogous to the :class:`~unyt.array.unyt_quantity`. You may encounter this being returned by :mod:`numpy` functions. Cosmology-aware scalar values can be initialized similarly:

.. code-block:: python

   import unyt as u
   from swiftsimio.objects import cosmo_quantity, cosmo_factor

   my_cosmo_quantity = cosmo_quantity(
       2,
       u.Mpc,
       comoving=False,
       scale_factor=0.5,
       cosmo_factor=1,
   )
